JUNIOR ADVANCE LESSON 1

Starting with the End in Mind

INTRODUCTION
Have you heard of the saying "Start with the end in mind”? To start with the end in mind means to think about how you would like things to turn out before you start making a plan
The end that you start with can either be a dream or be a goal that you have
In this lesson you will learn the difference between the two and how you can turn a dream into a goal and work towards achieving it

A DREAM is something that you strongly desire or want to happen
Some examples include:
• I dream of becoming an Olympic athlete
• I dream of going on a world tour
• I dream of flying into space one day

A GOAL is a specific result or outcome that a person wants and makes a plan to achieve
Some examples include:
• My goal is to be able to run 100 metres in under 9 seconds in the next 4 years
• My goal is to finish this book in a week
• My goal is to save enough money to buy a bike by summer

CONVERT YOUR DREAMS INTO GOALS!
In order to make our dreams achievable, we need to convert them into specific goals
Dream: I dream of becoming an Olympic Athlete
Goal: My goal is to be able to run 100 meters in under 9 seconds in the next 4 years

How do goals help you?
1. Provide you with direction
2. Measure your progress
3. Allow you to stay on course

Goals can be overwhelming sometimes. Having a goal alone won’t get you far
You need to have a PLAN to achieve your goal
Your plan will be the map that gets you to the destination, your goal

MAKING A PLAN FOR YOUR GOAL
There are 4 steps:
1. WRITE It down
Example: I want to be the fastest Olympic runner

2. Make it SMART
Example: I want to compete as a runner in the Summer Olympics 2024 and run in the 100 meter race
Tip: SMART stands for Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, Time-based

3. BRAINSTORM ideas
Example:
a. Run as much as possible
b. Find a trainer
c. Train daily
d. Maintain a healthy diet
e. Talk to my parents
f.  Save money
g. Research Olympic athletes

4. List down the ACTION steps to get there
Example:
a. Find a summer job
b. Invest in a good pair of running shoes
c. Hire a trainer
d. Create a running schedule
e. Plan a healthy diet
f. Compete in local and regional races
g. Keep track of my distances and times

LESSON SUMMARY
Let's take a look at what we learnt today
1. A dream is something that you strongly desire or want to happen
2. A goal is a specific result or outcome that a person wants and makes a plan to achieve
3. There are four steps in making a plan to achieve your goal:
i. Write it down
ii. Make it SMART
iii. Plan and take action
iv. List down the steps to get there


"JUNIOR ADVANCE LESSON 11

Financial Scams"

INTRODUCTION
What is a Scam? A scam is a trick to take your money and rip you off
Scams can come in many forms, but all are intended to get hold of your money
Scammers will work hard to make their scams believable and appealing
A scam is also known as a fraud
In this lesson we will learn about some financial scams you should be vary of

Play the video to see 'Financial Scams'

LESSON SUMMARY
Let's take a look at what we learnt today
1. Financial scams are intentional acts of deception with the sole purpose of getting others to part with their money
2. One of the most common scams is Phishing. Scammers send an email or text that appears to come from your bank asking you to click on a link
3. Social media scams are when scammers use social media posts to gather information about potential victims
4. It is important to keep your information safe, think before you click and be alert to avoid financial scams

"JUNIOR ADVANCE LESSON 12

Cyber Scams"

INTRODUCTION
Do you know that you can be electronically kidnapped?
That means someone can steal your 'internet identity' such as your user id and password and scam you
Someone can 'impersonate' you, which means pretend to be you, and steal your money
In this lesson you will learn more about such cyber scams and how to avoid them

A CYBER SCAM is any scam carried out by means of a COMPUTER or other devices via the INTERNET
One of the most common types of cyber scams is identity theft. What is identity theft?

IDENTITY THEFT happens when someone uses your personal information such as:
- name
- identification number
- credit card number
- other personal information
 to open new accounts, make purchases, get a loan, or file an illegal tax refund
All of this is done without your knowledge or your permission

Types of Identity Theft
1. Credit Card Fraud
If you lose your credit card or have it stolen, a scammer can use your card to make purchases in person or online
Scammers can also steal your credit card account number and other account information without having the actual card in hand
They can use this information to make purchases using your card or withdraw funds from your account

Types of Identity Theft
2. Online Banking Fraud
Most online banking fraud occurs in a two-step process:
1. The offender gets their hands on the customer's bank account information, like their username and password
2. The offender will use that information to move the victim's money to another account or withdraw it

Offenders often use one of the following ways to obtain personal information:
1. "Over the shoulder looking": The offender observes the potential victim making financial transactions and records the personal information
2. "Phishing": It involves sending fake emails to the victim to obtain the consumer's personal information
3. Malicious software gets installed to a victim's computer without them being aware of it. It detects and records the username and password whenever the victim uses it for online banking

Let’s take a look at some tips on how you can avoid Identity Theft
1. Lock your financial documents and records in a safe place at home, and lock your wallet or purse in a safe place at work
Shred receipts, loan applications, insurance forms, cheques, bank statements, expired credit cards, and similar documents when you don’t need them any longer

2. Before you share personal information at workplace, a business, school, or a doctor's office, ask why they need it, how they will safeguard it, and the consequences of not sharing

3. Be alert to impersonators. Make sure you know who is getting your personal or financial information
Don’t give out personal information on the phone, through the mail or online unless you’ve initiated the contact or know who you’re dealing with

4. Keep passwords private
Use strong and complex passwords with your laptop, credit card, bank and other accounts
Be creative, think of a special phrase and use the first letter of each word as your password
Substitute numbers for some words or letters. For example, “I want to see the Pacific Ocean” could become 1W2CtPo

Steps to take in case of identity theft:
- File a police report
- Close compromised accounts
- Review your bank accounts and place a fraud alert on them so that you will be contacted before any new accounts are opened in your name

LESSON SUMMARY
Let's take a look at what we learnt today
1. A CYBER SCAM is any scam carried out by means of a COMPUTER or other devices via the INTERNET
2. IDENTITY THEFT happens when someone uses your personal information to open new accounts, make purchases, get a loan, or file an illegal tax refund
3. Two main types of identity thefts are credit card fraud and online banking fraud
4. There are various measures you can take to avoid cyber scam and keep yourself safe

"JUNIOR ADVANCE LESSON 13

Currencies Around the World"

INTRODUCTION
When you travel to other countries, can you use the same money that you use in your own country? 
Your answer would mostly be 'No'
The reason is that most countries use different currencies
In this lesson you will learn about the major currencies in the world and what is meant by appreciation or depreciation of currency

CURRENCY is a generally accepted form of money, including coins and paper notes, which is issued by a government and circulated within an economy

Let’s look at some major currencies around the world
"1. THE USD
- Most traded currency across the globe
- America has the world’s largest economy
- Accounts for 88.3% of trading volume*
- USD is widely accepted by many countries"
Trading volume refers to how much of the currency is bought and sold all over the world
*https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Template:Most_traded_currencies

"2. THE EURO
- The EURO is the official currency for all countries that are members of the Eurozone
- The second most traded globally, accounts for 32.3% of trading volume*"
*https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Template:Most_traded_currencies

"3. THE JAPANESE YEN
The Japanese yen is the third most traded globally, accounting for a trading volume of 16.8%*"
*https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Template:Most_traded_currencies

"4. THE British pound
The pound sterling is the currency of the United Kingdom and its territories, and the fourth most traded globally at 12.8% of trading volume*"
*https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Template:Most_traded_currencies

"5. THE AUSTRALIAN DOLLAR
The Australian dollar is the currency of the Commonwealth of Australia and the fifth most traded globally, accounting for a trading volume of 6.8%*"
*https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Template:Most_traded_currencies

"6. THE CANADIAN DOLLAR
The Canadian dollar is the currency of Canada and the sixth most traded globally, accounting for a trading volume of 5%*"
*https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Template:Most_traded_currencies

"7. THE SWISS FRANC
The Swiss franc is the currency of Switzerland and the seventh most traded globally, accounting for a trading volume of 5%*"
*https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Template:Most_traded_currencies

"8. CHINESE RENMINBI (CNH)
The Chinese renminbi – sometimes referred to colloquially as the ‘yuan’ – is the currency of the People’s Republic of China and the eighth most traded globally, accounting for a trading volume of 4.3%*"
*https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Template:Most_traded_currencies

The forces of SUPPLY and DEMAND decide the price at which different currencies are traded
1. When demand is greater than supply, value of the currency will go up
2. When supply is greater than demand, value of the currency will go down

If a currency decreases its worth in terms of other currencies, we say it depreciates
If a currency increases its worth in terms of other currencies, we say it appreciates
Consider a scenario where the demand for Japanese electronics increases in the US
US will need to buy more electronics from Japan, and will need more Japanese yen to do so
As the demand for Japan yen increases its value rises. Thus, the dollar tends to be worth less vis-a-vis the yen
Under such conditions we say the U.S. dollar depreciates vis-a-vis the Japanese yen

LESSON SUMMARY
Let's take a look at what we learnt today
1. Currency is a generally accepted form of money, including coins and paper notes, which is issued by a government and circulated within an economy
2. Some of the major currencies in the world are:
- American dollar
- The Euro
- Japanese Yen
- British pound
- Chinese Renminbi
3. The forces of supply and demand decide the price at which different currencies are traded
